docs: Add docs for PKCS#11 provider (#17312)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/enterprise/pkcs11-provider/index.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: PKCS#11 Provider - Vault Enterprise
description: |-

>   Vault Enterprise ...

Reviewer: Needs more description here?

Author: I'll update this.

---

# PKCS#11 Provider

[PKCS#11](http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/os/pkcs11-base-v2.40-os.html)
is an open standard C API that provides a means to access cryptographic capabilities on a device.
For example, it is often used to access a Hardware Security Module (HSM) (like a [Yubikey](https://www.yubico.com/)) from a local program (such as [GPG](https://gnupg.org/).

> Vault provides a PKCS#11 library (or provider) so that Vault can be used as a SSM (Software Security Module).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vault provides a PKCS#11 library (or provider) so that Vault can be used as an SSM (Software Security Module).
```

> This allows a user to treat Vault like any other PKCS#11 device, so you can manage keys, objects, and perform encryption and decryption in Vault using PKCS#11 calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows a user to treat Vault like any other PKCS#11 device so you can manage keys, objects, and perform encryption and decryption in Vault using PKCS#11 calls.
```

> It uses Vault's [KMIP Secrets Engine](/docs/secrets/kmip) to provide cryptographic operations and object storage.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what "It" is referring to.

Author: I will clarify.

[slots](http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/os/pkcs11-base-v2.40-os.html#_Toc416959678) (logical devices)
to Vault instances and KMIP scopes and configures how the library will authenticate to KMIP (with a client TLS certificate).
The PKCS#11 library will look for this file in `vault-pkcs11.hcl` and `/etc/vault-pkcs11.hcl` by default, or you can override this by setting the `VAULT_KMIP_CONFIG` environment variable.

For example,

```hcl
slot {
    server = "127.0.0.1:5696"
    tls_cert_path = "cert.pem"
    ca_path = "ca.pem"
    scope = "my-service"
}
```

The `slot` block configures the first PKCS#11 slot to point to Vault.
Most programs will use only one slot.

- `server` (required): the Vault server's IP or DNS name and port number (5696 is the default).
- `tls_cert_path` (required): the location of the client TLS certificate used to authenticate to the KMIP engine.
- `tls_key_path` (optional, defaults to the value of `tls_cert_path`): the location of the encrypted or unencrypted TLS key used to authenticate to the KMIP engine.
- `ca_path` (required): the location of the CA bundle that will be used to verify the server's certificate.

> - `scope` (required): the KMIP scope to authenticate against and where the TDE master keys and associated metadata will be stored.

Author: :+1:

- `cache` (optional, default `true`): if the provider uses a cache to improve the performance of `C_GetAttributeValue` (KMIP: `GetAttributes`) calls.
- `emulate_hardware` (optional, default `false`): specifies if the provider should report that it is connected to a hardware device.

The default location the PKCS#11 library will look for the configuration file is the current directory (`vault-pkcs11.hcl`) and `/etc/vault-pkcs11.hcl`, but you can override this by setting the `VAULT_KMIP_CONFIG` environment variable to any file.

Environment variables can be also used to configure these parameters and more.

- `VAULT_KMIP_CONFIG`: location of the HCL configuration file. By default, the provider will check `./vault-pkcs11.hcl` and `/etc/vault-pkcs11.hcl`.

> - `VAULT_KMIP_CERT_FILE`: location of the TLS certificate to be used for authentication to the KMIP engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `VAULT_KMIP_CERT_FILE`: location of the TLS certificate used for authentication to the KMIP engine.
```

> - `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_FILE`: location of the TLS key to be used for authentication to the KMIP engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_FILE`: location of the TLS key used for authentication to the KMIP engine.
```

- `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_PASSWORD`: password for the TLS key file, if it is encrypted to the KMIP engine.

> - `VAULT_KMIP_CA_FILE`: location of the TLS CA bundle to be used to authenticate the connection to the KMIP engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `VAULT_KMIP_CA_FILE`: location of the TLS CA bundle used to authenticate the connection to the KMIP engine.
```

- `VAULT_KMIP_SERVER`: address and port of the KMIP engine to use for encryption and storage.
- `VAULT_KMIP_SCOPE`: KMIP scope to use for encryption and storage
- `VAULT_KMIP_CACHE`: whether or not to cache `C_GetAttributeValue` (KMIP: `GetAttributes`) calls.
- `VAULT_LOG_LEVEL`: the log level that the provider will use. Defaults to `WARN`. Valid values include `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARN`, `ERROR`, and `OFF`.
- `VAULT_LOG_FILE`: the location of the file the provider will use for logging. Defaults to standard out.

> - `VAULT_EMULATE_HARDWARE`: whether or not the provider will report that it is backed by a hardware device.

Author: It's a little redundant, but it feels too crowded if I try to add all of these details in the previous block. I'm open to suggestion though on how to simplify.

## Encrypted TLS Key Support

> The TLS key returned by the KMIP engine is by default unencrypted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TLS key returned by the KMIP engine is unencrypted by default.
```

However, the PKCS#11 provider does support (limited) encryption options for the key using [RFC 1423](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1423).
We would only recommend using AES-256-CBC out of the available algorithms.

The keys from KMIP should be ECDSA keys, and can be encrypted with a password with OpenSSL, e.g.,:

```sh
openssl ec -in cert.key -out encrypted.key -aes-256-cbc
```

The PKCS#11 provider will need access to the password to decrypt the TLS key.
The password can be supplied to the provider in two ways:

- The `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_PASSWORD` environment variable, or
- the "PIN" parameter to the `C_Login` PKCS#11 function will be used to try to decrypt an encrypted TLS key.

> Note that only a single password can be supplied via the `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_PASSWORD`, so if multiple slots in the HCL file use encrypted TLS keys, they will either need to be encrypted with the same password, or use the `C_Login` method to specify the password.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that only a single password can be supplied via the `VAULT_KMIP_KEY_PASSWORD`, so if multiple slots in the HCL file use encrypted TLS keys, they will need to be encrypted with the same password, or use the `C_Login` method to specify the password.
```

| Code | Meaning                                                          |
| ---- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 400  | Invalid input was provided in the configuration or PKCS#11 call. |
| 401  | Invalid credentials were provided.                               |
| 404  | The object, attribute, or key was not found.                     |
| 600  | An unknown I/O error occurred.                                   |
| 601  | A KMIP engine error occured.                                     |

## Capabilities

The Vault PKCS#11 provider implements the following PKCS#11 provider profiles:

- [Baseline](http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-profiles/v2.40/os/pkcs11-profiles-v2.40-os.html#_Toc416960548)
- [Extended](http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-profiles/v2.40/os/pkcs11-profiles-v2.40-os.html#_Toc416960554)

The following mechanisms are currently supported, as of Vault 1.12:

| Name               | Mechanism Number |
| ------------------ | ---------------- |
| AES key generation | `0x1080`         |
| AES-CBC            | `0x1082`         |
| AES-CBC Pad        | `0x1085`         |
| AES-CTR            | `0x1086`         |

> | AES-GCM            | `0x1087`         |

Reviewer: I'm curious where these mechanism numbers come from? I didn't seem them in the Baseline and Extended links above.

Reviewer 3: You want the `pkcs11t.h` file of some distributions: https://github.com/nss-dev/nss/blob/master/lib/util/pkcs11t.h 

http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/errata01/os/include/pkcs11-v2.40/pkcs11t.h

The values in the second header file are definitive; the HTML/... spec sometimes has wrong values and they always defer to the value in the shipped header file.

Author: The `pkcs11t.h` file is also in this repository, as that is where we get the numbers from in the library.

  - [x]  `C_GetTokenInfo`
  - [x]  `C_GetMechanismList`
  - [x]  `C_GetMechanismInfo`
  - [x]  `C_OpenSession`
  - [x]  `C_CloseSession`
  - [x]  `C_CloseAllSessions`
  - [x]  `C_GetSessionInfo`
  - [ ]  `C_InitToken`
  - [ ]  `C_InitPIN`
  - [ ]  `C_SetPIN`
  - [ ]  `C_GetOperationState`
  - [ ]  `C_SetOperationState`
  - [ ]  `C_GetFunctionStatus`
  - [ ]  `C_CancelFunction`
  - [ ]  `C_WaitForSlotEvent`
- Signing
  - [ ]  `C_SignInit`
  - [ ]  `C_Sign`
  - [ ]  `C_SignUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_SignFinal`
  - [ ]  `C_SignRecoverInit`
  - [ ]  `C_SignRecover`
  - [ ]  `C_VerifyInit`
  - [ ]  `C_Verify`
  - [ ]  `C_VerifyUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_VerifyFinal`
  - [ ]  `C_VerifyRecoverInit`
  - [ ]  `C_VerifyRecover`
- Digests
  - [ ]  `C_DigestInit`
  - [ ]  `C_Digest`
  - [ ]  `C_DigestUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_DigestKey`
  - [ ]  `C_DigestFinal`
  - [ ]  `C_DigestEncryptUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_DecryptDigestUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_SignEncryptUpdate`
  - [ ]  `C_DecryptVerifyUpdate`
- Random Number Generation
  - [ ]  `C_SeedRandom`
  - [ ]  `C_GenerateRandom`

## Limitations and Notes

Due to the nature of Vault, the KMIP Secrets Engine, and PKCS#11, there are some other limitations to be aware of:

> - The key and object IDs returned by `C_FindObjects`, etc., are randomized for each session, and cannot be shared between sessions and have no meaning after a session is closed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The key and object IDs returned by `C_FindObjects`, etc., are randomized for each session, and cannot be shared between sessions; they have no meaning after a session is closed.
```

>   This is because KMIP objects, which are used to store the PKCS#11 objects, have long random strings as IDs, but the PKCS#11 object ID is limited to a 32-bit integer, in addition to the fact that the PKCS#11 provider does not have any local storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This is because KMIP objects, which are used to store the PKCS#11 objects, have long random strings as IDs, but the PKCS#11 object ID is limited to a 32-bit integer. Also, the PKCS#11 provider does not have any local storage.
```

> - The PKCS#11 provider's performance will be heavily dependent on the latency to the Vault server and its performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The PKCS#11 provider's performance is heavily dependent on the latency to the Vault server and its performance.
```

with the KMIP Secrets Engine.

| Operating System | Architecture | Distribution      | glibc   |
| ---------------- | -------------| ----------------- | ------- |
| Linux            | x86-64       | RHEL 7 compatible | 2.17    |
| Linux            | x86-64       | RHEL 8 compatible | 2.28    |
| Linux            | x86-64       | RHEL 9 compatible | 2.34    |
| macOS            | x86-64       | &mdash;           | &mdash; |

The provider comes in the form of a shared C library, `libvault-pkcs11.so` (for Linux) or `libvault-pkcs11.dylib` (for macOS).
It can be downloaded from [releases.hashicorp.com](https://releases.hashicorp.com/vault-pkcs11-provider).

## Quick Start

1. To use the provider, you will need access to a Vault Enterprise instance with the KMIP Secrets Engine.

    For example, you can start one locally (if you have a license in the `VAULT_LICENSE` environment variable) with:

    ```sh
    docker pull hashicorp/vault-enterprise &&
    docker run --name vault \
      -p 5696:5696 \
      -p 8200:8200 \
      --cap-add=IPC_LOCK \
      -e VAULT_LICENSE=$(printenv VAULT_LICENSE) \
      -e VAULT_ADDR=http://127.0.0.1:8200 \
      -e VAULT_TOKEN=root \

>       -e VAULT_ADDR=http://127.0.0.1:8200 \

Reviewer: Duplicate line?

```suggestion
```

      hashicorp/vault-enterprise \
      server -dev -dev-root-token-id root -dev-listen-address 0.0.0.0:8200
    ```

1. Configure the [KMIP Secrets Engine](/docs/secrets/kmip) and a KMIP *scope*. The scope is used to hold keys and objects.

    ```sh
    vault secrets enable kmip
    vault write kmip/config listen_addrs=0.0.0.0:5696
    vault write -f kmip/scope/my-service
    vault write kmip/scope/my-service/role/admin operation_all=true
    vault write -f -format=json kmip/scope/my-service/role/admin/credential/generate | tee kmip.json
    ```

    ~> **Important**: When configuring KMIP in production, you will probably need to set the

>     `server_hostnames` and `server_ips` [configuration parameters](https://www.vaultproject.io/api-docs/secret/kmip#parameters),

Reviewer: I think this can use a relative link:

```suggestion
    `server_hostnames` and `server_ips` [configuration parameters](/api-docs/secret/kmip#parameters),
```

[slots](http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/os/pkcs11-base-v2.40-os.html#_Toc416959678) (logical devices)
to Vault instances and KMIP scopes and configures how the library will authenticate to KMIP (with a client TLS certificate).
The PKCS#11 library will look for this file in `vault-pkcs11.hcl` and `/etc/vault-pkcs11.hcl` by default, or you can override this by setting the `VAULT_KMIP_CONFIG` environment variable.

For example,

```hcl
slot {
    server = "127.0.0.1:5696"
    tls_cert_path = "cert.pem"
    ca_path = "ca.pem"
    scope = "my-service"
}
```

The `slot` block configures the first PKCS#11 slot to point to Vault.
Most programs will use only one slot.

- `server` (required): the Vault server's IP or DNS name and port number (5696 is the default).
- `tls_cert_path` (required): the location of the client TLS certificate used to authenticate to the KMIP engine.
- `tls_key_path` (optional, defaults to the value of `tls_cert_path`): the location of the encrypted or unencrypted TLS key used to authenticate to the KMIP engine.
- `ca_path` (required): the location of the CA bundle that will be used to verify the server's certificate.

> - `scope` (required): the [KMIP scope](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kmip#scopes-and-roles) to authenticate against and where the TDE master keys and associated metadata will be stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `scope` (required): the [KMIP scope](/docs/secrets/kmip#scopes-and-roles) to authenticate against and where the TDE master keys and associated metadata will be stored.
```
